feat: Add a login/logout example for View-based access control chapter (#558)
vaadin/docs: articles/flow/security/best-practices.asciidoc

To enable and use this mechanism, the following should be added to a Vaadin Flow application (if it does not exist already):

- A login view.
- Logout capability.
- A `VaadinServiceInitListener` that adds `ViewAccessChecker` as the `BeforeEnterListener` of all UIs.
- A Service Provider under `META-INF/services` to load above the custom [classname]#ServiceInitListener# via the Java SPI loading mechanism.

> === Handle User's Login and Logout
> 
> The way how to get the authenticated user and how to login/logout the user may vary from application to application.
> Vaadin View-based access control implementation uses [methodname]#HttpServletRequest::getUserPrincipal()# and [methodname]#HttpServletRequest.isUserInRole(String)# to check whether the currently authenticated user has access to the view.
> Thus, you have to use a solutions, which put the user information into request.
> The example below uses currently active Vaadin servlet request and shows how to:
> 
> - Check whether the user is currently authenticated to the application or not.
> The request is not available in background threads, so this method shows authentication state only in Vaadin request processing threads, otherwise it would always return `false`.
> - Authenticate the user with the given credentials.
> When this method is called from background threads, the authentication would always fail.
> - Logout the user by invalidating the http session and redirecting to the home page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Handle User's Login and Logout

There are many ways to handle login and logout, and how to get the authenticated user for a request.
The View-based access control implementation in Vaadin uses [methodname]#getUserPrincipal()# and [methodname]#isUserInRole(String)# in [classname]#HttpServletRequest# to check whether the currently authenticated user has access to the view.
Therefore, you need a way to put the user information into the request.

The example below uses the currently active Vaadin servlet request.
It shows how to:

- Check whether the user is currently authenticated to the application or not.
The request is not available in background threads, so the [methodname]#isAuthenticated()# method shows authentication state only in Vaadin request processing threads, otherwise it would always return `false`.
- Authenticate the user with the given credentials.
The [methodname]#authenticate()# method fails if is called from a background thread.
- Logout the user by invalidating the HTTP session and redirecting to the home page.
```

.[filename]#SecurityUtils.java#
[source,java]
----
public class SecurityUtils {

    private static final String LOGOUT_SUCCESS_URL = "/";

    public static boolean isAuthenticated() {
        VaadinServletRequest request = VaadinServletRequest.getCurrent();
        return request != null && request.getUserPrincipal() != null;
    }

    public static boolean authenticate(String username, String password) {
        if (VaadinServletRequest.getCurrent() != null) {
            VaadinServletRequest request = VaadinServletRequest.getCurrent();
            try {
                request.login(username, password);
                return true;
            } catch (ServletException e) {
                // login exception handle code omitted
                return false;
            }
        }
        // This is in a background thread and we cannot access the request to
        // log in the user

>         return false;

Reviewer: Consider returning false in the beginning if getCurrent() == null. Maybe more clear structure.

----
@Route("login")
@PageTitle("Login")
public class LoginView extends VerticalLayout implements BeforeEnterObserver,
        ComponentEventListener<AbstractLogin.LoginEvent> {

    private static final String LOGOUT_SUCCESS_URL = "/";

    private LoginForm login = new LoginForm();
    private SecurityService securityService;

>     @Inject

Author: Not sure I understand the comment. `@Inject` works here, I tested with demo project. And I believe `@Inject` is a pretty much basic thing and should be knows for devs who start trying security features with Java EE.

>     @Inject

Reviewer 2: Yes, `@Inject` works but it may not be obvious for everyone.

But since you added `@VaadinServiceScoped` it this actually doesn't work or would not work like intended

>     public LoginView(SecurityService securityService) {

Author: Yep, it's better to show it first

        this.securityService = securityService;
        addClassName("login-view");
        setSizeFull();

        setJustifyContentMode(JustifyContentMode.CENTER);
        setAlignItems(Alignment.CENTER);

        login.addLoginListener(this);

        add(new H1("Test Application"), login);
    }

    @Override
    public void beforeEnter(BeforeEnterEvent beforeEnterEvent) {
        if (beforeEnterEvent.getLocation()
            .getQueryParameters()
            .getParameters()
            .containsKey("error")) {
            login.setError(true);
        }
    }

    @Override
    public void onComponentEvent(AbstractLogin.LoginEvent loginEvent) {
        boolean authenticated = securityService.authenticate(
                loginEvent.getUsername(), loginEvent.getPassword());
        if (authenticated) {
            UI.getCurrent().getPage().setLocation(LOGOUT_SUCCESS_URL);
        } else {
            login.setError(true);
        }
    }
}
----

In this example, Vaadin's Login Form component is used for the sake of brevity.
However, feel free to implement your own login view, if you wish.

> === Logout capability

Author: ```suggestion
=== Logout Capability
```

For handling logout in web applications, one typically uses a logout button.
Here is a basic implementation of logout button shown on the main layout's header:

.[filename]#MainLayout.java#
[source,java]
----
public class MainLayout extends AppLayout {

    private SecurityService securityService;

    @Inject
    public MainLayout(SecurityService securityService) {
        this.securityService = securityService;

        H1 logo = new H1("Vaadin CRM");
        logo.addClassName("logo");
        HorizontalLayout header;
        if (securityService.isAuthenticated()) {
            Button logout = new Button("Logout", click ->
                    securityService.logout());
            header = new HorizontalLayout(logo, logout);
        } else {
            header = new HorizontalLayout(logo);
        }

        // Other page components omitted.

        addToNavbar(header);
    }
}
----

The way how to get the authenticated user and how to logout the user may vary from application to application.
Here is a basic example how to do that with Vaadin API:

.[filename]#SecurityService.java#
[source,java]
----

> @VaadinServiceScoped

Reviewer 2: How is this supposed to work ? I don't think there is a mention of CDI anywhere. This will not work with standard Java DI.

Maybe you should store the user details to the `VaadinSession` with `setAttribute(Class<UserInfo>, UserInfo)` instead ?

Author: Well, to avoid the CDI here in these examples, I could make this service an util class instead with static methods.
`ViewAccessChecker` relies on `HttpServletRequest::isUserInRole` by default, thus, I don't see how putting the attribute to a session will then let `isUserInRole` to work.

Reviewer 2: Right - well not sure which is better. One thing to note is that `VaadinServletReqquest.getCurrent` will not work for any background thread so the pattern would be a bit fragile if it is just a static utility class. A lot of explaining would be needed to be done to explain how it is not actually recommended

Reviewer 2: Oh well, that applies to the whole `ViewAccessChecker` and that should be documented here somewhere too. Probably missed out from the initial code review but I think documenting this is enough

Author: > One thing to note is that VaadinServletReqquest.getCurrent will not work for any background thread so the pattern would be a bit fragile if it is just a static utility class

ViewAccessChecker itself won't work if no request is available: https://github.com/vaadin/flow/blob/d17359acea9f0ef42c2f0d751bb92028ae047d0d/flow-server/src/main/java/com/vaadin/flow/server/auth/ViewAccessChecker.java#L128-L133

I propose to use an utility class and add comments/explanations there that it works like this. Artur suggests using a Shiro, but for the purpose of this chapter it will extra. But mention it might be fine.

        setJustifyContentMode(JustifyContentMode.CENTER);
        setAlignItems(Alignment.CENTER);

        login.addLoginListener(this);

        add(new H1("Test Application"), login);
    }

    @Override
    public void beforeEnter(BeforeEnterEvent beforeEnterEvent) {
        if (beforeEnterEvent.getLocation()
            .getQueryParameters()
            .getParameters()
            .containsKey("error")) {
            login.setError(true);
        }
    }

    @Override
    public void onComponentEvent(AbstractLogin.LoginEvent loginEvent) {
        boolean authenticated = SecurityUtils.authenticate(
                loginEvent.getUsername(), loginEvent.getPassword());
        if (authenticated) {
            UI.getCurrent().getPage().setLocation(LOGIN_SUCCESS_URL);
        } else {
            login.setError(true);
        }
    }
}
----

In this example, Vaadin's Login Form component is used for the sake of brevity.
However, feel free to implement your own login view, if you wish.

=== Logout Capability

> For handling logout in web applications, one typically uses a logout button.
> Here is a basic implementation of logout button shown on the main layout's header:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You typically let the user to log out by using a logout button.

The following example shows a basic implementation of a logout button shown on the header of the main layout:
```
